---
layout: post
title: "Statement on Public Health Emergency"
date: 2020-03-27
author: NMSAAM Board of Directors
geometry: 
- top=1in
- left=1in
- right=1in
- bottom=1in
---

**For Immediate Release**

On **March 11, 2020,** Michelle Lujan Grisham, the Governor of the
State of New Mexico, declared in Executive Order 2020-004 (*EO
2020-004*) that a Public Health Emergency exists under the Public
Health Emergency Response Act.

On **March 23, 2020**, Kathyleen M Kunkel, Cabinet Secretary for the
New Mexico Department of Health, on direction from the Governor
pursuant to *EO 2020-004* issued a <u>Public health emergency order
closing all businesses and non-profit entities except for those deemed
essential and providing additional restriction on mass gatherings due
to COVID -19</u>; which gave a list of essential businesses and ordered
all other businesses to close and for New Mexico citizens to remain at
home unless engaging in essential business.

On **March 24, 2020,** Kathyleen M Kunkel, Cabinet Secretary for the
New Mexico Department of Health, on direction from the Governor
pursuant to *EO 2020-004* issued a <u>Public health emergency order
imposing temporary restrictions on non-essential health care services,
procedures, and surgeries; providing guidance on those restrictions;
and requiring a report from certain health care providers</u>;
prohibiting all health care providers, including Doctors of Oriental
Medicine, from providing non-essential health care services;
"non-essential health care services, procedures, and surgeries" are
defined as those that can be delayed for three (3) months without
undue risk to the patients health; the order takes effect March 27,
2020; and each health care provider or facility that is subject to the
prohibition on non-essential health care services must provide a
report to the Department of Health.

On **March 24, 2020**, Kathyleen M Kunkel, Cabinet Secretary for the
New Mexico Department of Health, on direction from the Governor
pursuant to *EO 2020-004* issued a <u>Public health emergency order
temporarily regulating the sale and distribution of personal
protective equipment due to shortages caused by COVID-19</u>; which
prevents health care providers, including Doctors of Oriental
Medicine, from selling, allocating, or otherwise distributing Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE) without approval from the Department of
Health; it also directs every health care provider, including Doctors
of Oriental Medicine, that have inventory of PPE to report to the
Department of Health describing its inventory of PPE.

## Recommendations for New Mexico Acupuncturists

*Acupuncturist* means a Doctor of Oriental Medicine, extern, or
student practicing according to Chapter 61 Article 14A NMSA 1978 the
*Acupuncture and Oriental Medicine Practice Act*.

*NMSAAM is not qualified to give legal advice, and nothing in this
document is intended to act as or substitute for legal advice. NMSAAM
does not take any liability, expressed or implied, for acupuncturists
who act on anything contained in this document; it is provided as is
and for information only.*

In light of *EO 2020-004* and the *public health emergency orders*
issued pursuant to it, the New Mexico Society of Acupuncture and Asian
Medicine (NMSAAM) makes the following recommendations to
acupuncturists practicing in the state of New Mexico:

<ol type="1"> 

<li>New Mexico acupuncturists should immediately determine which of
their patients can safely discontinue in person treatments without
undue risk to the patients health, keeping in mind the following
recommendations:

<ol type="A">

<li>Patients who are not likely to require hospitalization due to
postponing in person treatments should be strongly considered for
postponing acupuncture and in person treatments;</li>

<li>Acupuncturists are encouraged to use their clinical judgment when
adjusting patient treatment plans;</li>

<li>If at all possible, in person treatments should be discontinued
until either EO 2020-004 expires or further guidance is received from
the Department of Health;</li></ol></li>

<li>New Mexico acupuncturists should immediately begin the process of
offering video, phone, and other telemedicine services to their
patients; acupuncturists are reminded that only services determined
essential should be offered at this time;</li>

<li>New Mexico acupuncturists should inform the Department of Health
of their plan to comply with <u>Public health emergency order imposing
temporary restrictions on non-essential health care services,
procedures, and surgeries; providing guidance on those restrictions;
and requiring a report from certain health care providers</u> and
should include at a minimum:

<ol type="A">

<li>Which services will generally be considered essential and offered
during the public health emergency;</li>

<li>Which services will generally be considered non-essential and not
offered during the public health emergency;</li>

<li>A statement that the acupuncturist will use their clinical
judgment in determining which specific treatments and services are
essential to patient safety;</li>

<li>A statement on how the acupuncturist will be available for contact
to patients to co-ordinate continuation of care, including phone,
email, or online visits;</li>

<li>One letter or email per clinic, with all acupuncturists practicing
at the clinic listed, should be sufficient; it is not necessary for
each acupuncturist at a clinic to submit a report; </li>

<li>Reports should be submitted to: <a
href="https://www.emailmeform.com/builder/form/pQ5Z4fAr6SKxdt3JEv7f19">www.emailmeform.com/builder/form/pQ5Z4fAr6SKxdt3JEv7f19</a>
<strong>as soon as possible</strong></li></ol></li>

<li>New Mexico acupuncturists should inform the department of health
of any inventory of PPE, if any; PPE includes: gloves, medical masks,
goggles, face shields, other eye protection, respirators (N95 or FFP2
standard or equivalent), and aprons used by health care providers;

<ol type="A">

<li>One report per clinic, with all acupuncturists practicing at the
clinic listed, should be sufficient; it is not necessary for each
acupuncturist at a clinic to submit a report;</li>

<li>If the acupuncturist or clinic does not have any inventory of PPE,
they may send a statement stating so to the Department of Health;</li>

<li>Reports should be submitted to <a
href="mailto:Section.DOC-Planning@state.nm.us">Section.DOC-Planning@state.nm.us</a>;</li></ol></li>

<li>New Mexico acupuncturists should look to the Department of
Health's website and the Governor's website for further communications

<ol type="A">

<li><a href="https://cv.nmhealth.org/public-health-orders-and-executive-orders">cv.nmhealth.org/public-health-orders-and-executive-orders</a></li>

<li><a href="https://www.governor.state.nm.us">www.governor.state.nm.us</a></li></ol></li>

</ol>

NMSAAM will continue to provide information to the profession as it is
provided to us and as we become aware of it. Thank you all for making
the practice of acupuncture and Asian medicine one of the safest
systems of medicine practiced in New Mexico.

-----------------------------------------

## Approved March 27, 2020

Approved unanimously by the executive committee of the New Mexico
Society for Acupuncture and Asian Medicine and approved by the board
of directors of the same the 27th day of March, 2020

### NMSAAM Board Of Directors

* John Scott, DOM President 
* Yvonne Walston, DOM Vice President
* Elene Gusch, DOM Secretary
* Steven Malins, DOM Treasurer
* Amanda Wheat, DOM 
* Yvette Arellano, DOM 
* Ann Losee, DOM 
* Jennifer Rysanek, DOM 
* Bernadette Lujan, DOM 

